---
title: OS Mode
categories: ["Computer Science", "Operating System"]
tags: ["basic knowledge"]
date: 2023-10-09 10:48 +0900
author: jun
---

## Operating System

Most of modern operating system likes Windows, Mac, Linux we can control by mouse and keyboard because they support **graphical user interface**. But some oldest os for example DOS is not support gui only has **command line interface**. A detailed history of operating system is not key point in here but it helps to understand different each cpu model.

> Also this article is deal with only x86 architecture processor because **os mode** concept is unique to that.
{: .prompt-info}

## OS mode

Since firstly has not many mode in x86 architecture. First model is only have one mode that **Real mode** however hardware is continuously enhancement so to control their os also need new features. In this reasons, current x86 architecture has more mode either first os. You can see all of mode in [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_mode) but in this article we talk about only **real mode**, **protected mode**, **long mode**. If you want to know more mode find more in wikipedia :D

### real mode

Real mode was only available mode before protected mode is release and it isn't name at first. But still using this mode when cpu is boot because of **backwoard compatibility**.

#### features

Real mode is 16-bit but maximum addressable memory size is near on 1 MB because processor has **20-bit address bus**. That means to access somewhere memory it need to more bits because their register can calculate only **16-bits**.

To resolve this issue processor use `segment` and `offset` to access memory with complex formula. There is six segment register `CS`, `DS`, `ES`, `FS`, `GS`, `SS`.

Real mode is directly load program on memory that means there aren’t any memory protection or multitasking. Other side, this mode is easy to control the hardware.

### protected mode

Protected mode is first added since **Intel 80286** and extended in **80386**. Real mode only load 1 program on memory cause the program directly loaded on memory but protected mode is use **virtual address**.

#### features

This mode is make possible use **segmentation**, **virtual memory**, **paging** and **multi tasking** to system software. Thus it was implemented also **memory protection**. Later 80386, processor is support swtich to real mode without reset and **virtual 8086 mode**.

### long mode

Long mode is x86-64 architecture mode that can access 64 bit instructions and registers. Long mode is not use segmentation because of performance reasons and it use paging.

---

## References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_mode)
- [osdev wiki](https://wiki.osdev.org/Real_Mode)